This Reproducible Research Case Study
involves trying to
identify the harmful elements of
particulate matter air pollution.
So, one thing that you have to understand
is that when you
look at air pollution in particular if you
look at particulate matter pollution.
The particles are just, you know, the, you
can feel them it's just dust that you
inhale.
But the dust is not just one monolithic
piece of you know, of dirt or soot.
It's actually composed of many different
chemical constituents.
Metals inert things like salts and other
kinds of components.
And so, there's a thought that, you know,
that one possibility is that,
is that a sub, subset of
those constituents are the really harmful
elements.
And if we could figure out which one of
those subsets are, are harmful.
Then we could think about trying to
regulate the sources that generate those
chemical instituents.
Now it's very hard to do this and the,
the research involved in this area is
still fairly preliminary.
But so but so there's a lot of interest in
trying to identify the harmful chemical
constituents of particulate matter.
Because in theory, that could lead us
to targeting or tailoring things like
regulations.
That can that can that can control the
sources of
air pollution that are the most harmful to
human health.
PM is composed of many different chemical
constituents.
And it's important to understand actually
that the EPA, or the
Environmental Protection Agency, monitors
the chemical
constituents of particulate matter on a.
And has been doing so since roughly 1999
or 2000 on a national basis.
and, and there's a general understanding
that, perhaps, some of
the components of PM might be more harmful
than others.
And if that were true, that would, prob,
that would likely
imply that some sources of particulate
matter are more dangerous than others.
Because some sources of particulate matter
generate certain combinations of chemical
constituents.
And some sources generate other com,
combinations of chemical constituents.
And so the idea is that we can, if we
can identify the particularly harmful
chemical constituents of particulate
matter.
Then that may lead us to strategies for,
to better
strategies for controlling sources of, the
sources of particulate matter.
One thing that you need to understand is
the
way that particulate matter is regulated
or controlled now.
Is we just regulate, our, the total amount
of
power, the total amount of particles in
the air.
Without regard to where the sources of p,
of PM what
the sources of PM are or where they are
coming from.
And so if, if we can do, and, and, and so
this
strategy is, it does help them pro, has,
doesn't improve public health.
Because know that particular manner, as a
whole, is harmful.
But it doesn't perhaps lead to the most
efficient strategy
and the most helpful strategy in terms of
public health.
Because we don't, we don't control things
with respect to which
toxic elements are the most, are, which
elements are the most toxic.
So, I just want to talk about one
particular study and
one examp, one case study of, of this type
of research.
And how, and I'll talk a little bit more
how it relates to reproducibility in a few
slides.
But the basis of this case study is, is
the
National Morbidity Mortality and Air
Pollution study or the NMMAPS study.
And this was a national study of the
short term health effects of ambient air
pollution.
So this parti-, this particular national
study
focused on particulate matter or PM 10.
So this is particles less than 10 microns
in diameter and ozone.
So for this partic, this lecture I'm just
going to talk about PM 10.
The health outcomes in the study were
mortality from
all causes and hospitalization for
cardiovascular and respiratory diseases.
So I've got some links to some of the key
publications from the NMMAPS study.
And and, and this entire study was fu, was
funded by the Health Effects Institute.
One of the interesting aspects of the
NMMAPS study was that it
was, it was one of the most reproducible
air pollution studies ever conducted.
In particular, the investigators in N, the
original investigators in NMMAPS decided
to make the data and, the results and the
software code available.
Through, a website called the internet
based
health and air pollution surveillance
system or iHAPSS.
And so on that website you can find the
air
pollution data, the, the weather data, the
software, the results.
And many other things, on that can be
downloaded for free.
Since the data have been made available
to the public many studies have been
conducted.
Based on this data that were independent
of the original NMMAPS.
So one particular study counted over 67
publish, publications based on the NMMAPS
data.
So the data and the code that have been
made available to the public.
That has served as an important test
bed for methodological development in this
area.
So one recent study that was published in
the journal Environmental
Health Perspectus involved the cardio,
cardiovascular
effects of nickel in the air.
So, nickel is a common component of
particulate matter.
It's a transition metal.
And it's thought to be very harmful and,
and in particular, cause cardiovascular
types of effects.
And so, this study found partic, they
found strong evidence that nickel in
particulate matter modified the short term
effect of PM 10 across 60 US communities.
So basically what this is saying is that
what they found is that in communities
where the particulate matter had a larger
concentration
of nickel in it, relative to other
elements.
That those communities saw kind of worse
health risks from PM 10
than other, than other communities that
had kind of less nickel in them.
So the idea is.
So, the, the inference that one might draw
from that is that
nickel is a one or maybe the only toxic
element in PM 10.
And if your particles are composed of more
nickel
then they are going to be more harmful to
you.
So that the, the evidence that they
brought in this paper,
or a part of the evidence that they
brought in this paper.
When they look at other chemical
constituents of particulate
matter, it didn't seem to have this same
modifying effect.
So if you looked at for example two
cities, in
where one city had much higher
concentrations of sulfate for example.
That did not lead to greater health risks.
The, compared to a city that had lower
concentrations of sulfate.
So, the main, one of the main modifying
effects came from this nickel element.
And so the result was very attractive
because it seemed to identify one or just
a few elements as, that, that led to the
kind of higher health risks of PM 10.
And so it's almost like there was a single
element that
needed to be, or, or just a very small
number of elements.
That could be regulated or controlled.
And so there is one, so there is a thought
that, you know, perhaps this was too
simple to be true.
So Francesca Dominici and myself and some
colleagues decided to look at the data
again.
And see you know what was driving the
association between
PM 10 risk and Nickel and another
transition metal called vanadium.
So we looked at the data, we re-examined
it
NMMAPS data and linked it with PM chemical
constituent data.
And one particular thought that we had was
one of the cities in
the U.S. that has extremely high levels of
nickel, is New York City.
And so, there's one possibility is that
because
New York City has such very high levels.
Would the results of such an analysis be
driven
by the high levels of nickel in New York
City?
So here's a simple scatter plot.
On the x-axis, we have the
long-term average nickel concentrations in
a community.
And on the x, on the y-axis, we have the,
essentially, the risk.
The percentage change, the percent
increase in
mortality for a unit increase in
particulate matter.
So you can think of this as the
particulate matter risk of mortality.
And one of the things that you might
notice
is that there does appear to be, a
correlation.
Between long term average nickel
concentrations
in a community and their PM risk.
In the sense that in the scatter plot if
you go
to the right there's, the risk seems to
increase a little bit.
Now on the other hand, one of the other
things you might see
in this plot is that there are, there
appear to be some outliers.
In the, on the right-hand side of the
plot.
There is three or few points that are
very highly they are kind of skewed to the
right.
And so, one, and, and it turns out that
the
three right most points are all counties
in New York City.
So New York City is composed of five
counties.
And so the three that are kind of the
right most
point of the plot are three counties in
New York City.
So, here is the regression line that you
can fit to this data.
It's a simple linear regression line and
you can see that it's positively sloped.
Indiciating a positive correlation so that
more nickel is
associated with a greater risk of
mortality from PM.
And in their original paper their
regression line was
statistically significant with a p value
of less than 0.01.
And so that's very interesting.
It would seem to imply that in communities
with
higher nickel concentrations you have
greater risk of mortality.
However, if you just remove the kind of
outlying points, in particular
the points that are asso, that are in New
York City.
Which has very high nickel levels, and you
redo the regression line.
You'll see that the blue line is what you
get.
And one of the important things about
those three points
to the right is those are called high
leverage points.
And so the regression line can be very
sensitive to high leverage points.
And so just removing three of them out of
this data
set can bring the bl-, the regression line
down a little bit.
So that you get the blue line, and that
it's no longer statistically significant.
And in this case, the p-value's about
0.31.
And so one of the things that you can see
is that just a
few points can make a big difference when
looking at a correlation like this.
On every analysis that we did, as we went
through,
and and recomputed the, the slope of the
regression line.
When you when you removed an individual
country or a community in this study.
So remember, there were 60 communities in
the original.
So what we did is we just went through
each and just redid the analysis by
removing one community.
Just to see if there were any particular
communities that the analysis was part,
was sensitive to.
And you can see that all the black dots
here represent the
kind of slopes of the regression line when
you remove a given community.
And because they're all kind of clustered
around the same value.
You can see that for the most part the
regression line
is not sensitive to removing any
individual community from the data set.
However, the red dot and red line at the
very bottom indicates the
kind of slope estimate and the 95%
confidence interval when you remove New
York.
And you can see that when you remove the
community of New York
slope estimate goes down quite a bit and
the confidence intervals goes up.
It gets quite a bit wider than all of the
other dots.
And so, that's another indication that the
slope
estimate of that regression line is very
sensitive.
To the kic, just having the data points
from New York City in there.
So in this analysis that we published
again in Environmental
Health Perspectives there are a couple
things that we learned.
First of all we did confirm that New York
does have very high
levels of nickel and vinadium Much higher
than pretty much any other U.S. community.
And that there's evidence of a positive
relationship between nickel concentrations
and PM risk.
Even if you remove the data from New York
City the relationship is still positive.
However, the strength of this relationship
is highly
sensitive to the observations from a
single city.
And so the idea is that the evidence that
you can bring
from the data, is really dependent on just
a few data points.
And so it's important to realize that
although the, we still
see this positive association between
nickle and PM risk of mortality.
The strength of the, the, the key, the key
conclusion that you might draw from this
reanalysis is that the strength of the
evidence
is perhaps not as strong as you would
like.
Due to the kind of very sensitive nature
of the,
of this, of the evidence to a single
community.
So, some of the lessons that we learned
from this case study are that,
is that the reproducibility of the end map
study from the, from the very beginning.
First of all it allowed for the secondary,
the original secondary analysis to occur.
To investigate this novel hypothesis that
nickel
is a harmful chemical constituent of PM.
So that's very good and the idea is that
it allowed other people to kind of explore
new ideas.
And so, the paper by Lipman et al is one
example of kind of secondary analysis.
The reproducibility of the study of course
allowed critique of this new analysis.
And to the and bring to the table
additional new analysis.
That was published by Dominici et al.
And so one of the lessons that we learned
from this paper of
course is that the original hypothesis
that Nicolas [UNKNOWN] was not really
invalidated.
But merely that the evidence that was
originally
presented is perhaps not as strong as
originally suggested.
And that more work needs to be done to
investigate this hypothesis.
So one of the other important lessons
learned from this case study.
Is that, you know, reproducibility makes
any scientific
discussion much more informed and much
more timely.
You can see that, in this case you know, a
hypothesis was proposed that nickel was a
harmful element of PM.
So people brought data to address this
hypothesis.
They presented the evidence from the data.
Other people, another set of
investigators, took the
same data, tried to look at this
hypothesis.
Confirmed that there was a positive
association.
But thought there was some weakness in the
present,
presentation of the evidence, and the
strength of the evidence.
And so there was a back and forth that was
highly informed.
Because everyone was using data, and
everyone's kind of be, there's
transparency and analysis.
And people can see what others have done.
And so this is how science evolves, how
ideas come forward, how
good ideas come to light and bad ideas are
kind of put to rest.
And that's how kind of good scientific
exchange occurs and how science moves
forward.
Moves forward.
So reproducibility is key to all this
entire process.
Because it makes the entire process form
and move in a timely manner that's
transparent.